# Create a Development Environment

[Flutter](https://github.com/flutter/flutter) is an open-source UI toolkit (framework) by Google for building natively compiled applications for mobile, web, and desktop from a single codebase. It uses the Dart programming language and provides fast development with features like hot reload.

Your [Flutter Development Environment](https://docs.flutter.dev/get-started/install/windows/mobile) must have the following components:

* [Flutter SDK](https://docs.flutter.dev/get-started/install)
* [Git](https://git-scm.com/)
* [Android Studio](https://developer.android.com/studio)
* [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/download)
* A Virtual Device

1. To install Flutter, download the [Flutter SDK bundle](https://docs.flutter.dev/release/archive) from its archive, move the bundle to where you want it stored, then extract the SDK from the zip file to `C:\Android\Flutter` folder. 

You can choose any destination but don't install Flutter to a directory that contains special characters or spaces, or the path requires elevated privileges.

2. Download and install Android Studio. I prefer downloading the zip file NOT the executable one. Extract the zip file to `C:\Android\Studio` folder. Open the Android Studio and run the Android Studio Setup Wizard.

Select custom setup and set the Android SDK path to `C:\Android\SDK` folder. 

After the Android Studio Setup Wizard completes, open the SDK Manager and from the SDK Tools tab, select the following components and click Apply.

* Android SDK Command-line Tools (Latest)
* Google USB Driver
* Google Web Driver

3. Download and install a Java Development Kit (JDK). I recommend using JDK version 17. Install or Unzip JDK to `C:\Java\jdk-17` folder. 

4. Create and configure the following environment variables.

| Variable Name | Value |
| ---- | ---- |
| JAVA_HOME | C:\Java\jdk-17 |
| ANDROID_STUDIO_HOME | C:\Android\studio |
| ANDROID_HOME | C:\Android\sdk |
| ANDROID_SDK_ROOT | C:\Android\sdk |
| FLUTTER_HOME | C:\Android\flutter |

5. Add the following entries to the Path variable:

* %JAVA_HOME%\bin
* %ANDROID_HOME%\tools
* %ANDROID_HOME%\tools\bin
* %ANDROID_HOME%\platform-tools
* %FLUTTER_HOME%\bin

6. Before you can use Flutter and after you install all prerequisites, agree to the licenses of the Android SDK platform.

```shell
PS> flutter doctor --android-licenses
```

7. Run the flutter doctor command to validate that all components of a complete Flutter development environment for Windows.

```shell
PS> flutter doctor
```    
When the flutter doctor command returns an error, it could be for Flutter, VS Code, Android Studio, the connected device, or network resources. If the flutter doctor command returns an error for any of these components, run it again with the verbose flag.

```shell    
PS> flutter doctor -v
```

If there are issues with android studio configuration, you can manually configure android studio as follows:

```shell
PS> flutter config --android-sdk "C:\Android\Sdk"
PS> flutter config --android-studio-dir "C:\Android\Studio"
PS> flutter config --jdk-dir="C:\Java\jdk-17\"
```

After setting up your development environment, you can verify the components running the following commands:

```shell
PS> dart --version
PS> flutter --version
```

## Flutter Configuration

You can get the Flutter configuration using the following command:

```shell
PS> flutter config --list
```

To reset configurations to their default state, you can delete or modify the ~/.flutter_settings file, or run:

```shell
PS> flutter config --clear-features
```

You can change the configuration using the following commands:

```shell
PS> flutter config --enable-linux-desktop
PS> flutter config --enable-macos-desktop
PS> flutter config --enable-windows-desktop
PS> flutter config --no-enable-web
```

## Flutter and Dart Plugins

You need to install Flutter and Dart plugins for Android Studio or VSCode to create flutter applications. 

After installing flutter extension to VSCode, you can access flutter commands by typing Flutter to command bar (F1 to open command bar).

Flutter: Launch Emulator

Settings -> Languages & Frameworks -> Flutter and check Format code on save.

Editor > General > Appearance > Show Closing Labels in Dart source code

## Create First Application

Run the following commands to create and run your first flutter application. Do NOT use spaces and dash character in folder names.

```shell
PS> flutter create first_app
PS> flutter run
```

## Uninstall Android Studio

1. Run the Android Studio uninstaller if available.

2. Remove the Android Studio files. In File Explorer, go to your user folder `%USERPROFILE%`, and delete `.android`, `.AndroidStudio` and any analogous directories with versions on the end, i.e. `.AndroidStudio1.2`, `.gradle` and `.m2` if they exist.

3. Also delete the any `AndroidStudio*` directories that are in `%LOCALAPPDATA%\Google` and `%APPDATA%\Google`.

4. Finally, go to `C:\Program Files` and delete the `Android` directory.

5. To delete any remains of the SDK, go to `%LOCALAPPDATA%` and delete the Android directory.

**Summary of all paths of leftover files from Android Studio**

* C:\Program Files\Android
* C:\Users\USERNAME\AppData\Local\Android
* C:\Users\USERNAME\AppData\Local\Google\AndroidStudio2024.2
* C:\Users\USERNAME\AppData\Roaming\Google\AndroidStudio2024.2
* C:\Users\USERNAME\.gradle
* C:\Users\USERNAME\.android
* C:\Users\USERNAME\.AndroidStudio
* C:\Users\USERNAME\.konan
* C:\Users\USERNAME\.m2